HARI SREENIVASAN: And to the
analysis of Shields and Brooks.
That's syndicated columnist
Mark Shields and New York
Times columnist David Brooks.
David, let me start with you.
Let's start talking about
the health care plan that the
Senate rolled out this week.
You surprised at what is
different, what's the same
between the House bill?
DAVID BROOKS: I'm
a little surprised.
First, it's sort
of Obamacare-lite.
It's not going to work.
It's functionally
nonoperational, because
it will encourage, when
they're healthy, to
exit the system and
then go back into the
system when they're sick.
And that's a recipe for a death
spiral in a lot of places.
So I think, functionally,
it's not going to work.
Politically, I have to
say, it's kind of canny.
Mitch McConnell had these
two wings of his party.
And I think he steered as well
as is possible to steer down
the middle to give the right,
the Ted Cruz folks the cuts
in Medicaid and Medicare
and stuff like that.
He gave the center basically
the structure of Obamacare
with some of the rules about
preexisting conditions.
So, I think, politically,
it's an act of skill.
And as I look forward, is this
thing going to pass, I still
think probably not because
I don't think you can get the
whole Republican Party behind
this thing, but I'm reminded
not to underestimate
Mitch McConnell.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Have the
Republicans made the case that
this is something better or
just that this is not Obamacare?
DAVID BROOKS: It's
not Obamacare.
What it does -- you ought
to start with, what kind
of country are we in?
We're in a country where
-- widening inequality.
And so I think it's possible to
be a conservative and to support
market mechanisms basically
to redistribute wealth down
to those who are suffering.
This bill doesn't do that.
It goes the other way.
So, I think, fundamentally, it
doesn't solve the basic problem
our country has, which is
a lot of people are
extremely vulnerable.
And so I do think, as a solution
any the range of health care
problems, I don't think it's
it.
I don't even think
repealing Obamacare.
It's a cheaper
version of Obamacare.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: Two things
hit me, first of all.
We know there's been
no debate, no hearings,
so that's been a cry.
But it's interesting, because
there is no public case to
be made for the Republican
plan, none.
I mean, at least with
the Obamacare, Affordable
Care Act, you could
say, no lifetime limit,
a children -- children
could stay on their
parents' plan until the
age of 26, no preexisting
condition will deny you
coverage, no lifetime
illness will knock you off.
There was a case.
You could argue
against the case.
There is no public case
that has been made in either
the House or the Senate.
So, they hold no hearings,
and there is no public debate,
because they don't want to
take the time to make
the case for it because
they don't have a case.
And they don't want to give
the other -- opposition
a case to make -- the
time to make the case
against it.
And what it is, the only thing
that the House and the Senate
are consistently faithful on
is that it's a major tax cut.
It is a redistribution.
Obama, who was, you know, if
anything, overly moderate for
many tastes, did, in fact, lay
it on the most advantaged among
us to pay, to cover people
who couldn't afford it in
his plan.
And a 3.8 percent tax
on unearned income for
those earning over a
quarter of a million
dollars became the rallying
cry, the organizing
principle for the opposition.
And that's the one constant
that has been through it all.
Warren Buffett, to his
everlasting credit,
pointed out that he
will get a tax cut under
the Republican plan
this year of $630,000.
That's the redistribution.
And, you know, in the
richest nation in the
history of the world, it
is a terrible indictment,
a sad commentary that the
most vulnerable among us, the
least -- the least among us
are really tossed off as
a political statement.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Well, what's
the Democratic counter to this?
I realize that they support
Obamacare at is core, but what
about the things that they
can agree on that
need improvements?
Why not come up with some
sort of a counter and
a fix and propose that?
MARK SHIELDS: Good question.
That's one of the reasons
there has been no debate is
threat at there hasn't been the
opportunity for debate.
They have foreclosed it.
But, no, the Democrats
have chosen to focus all
attention on the other.
I think it's one of the
problems the Democrats have.
I think they learned this week
in the Georgia 6 that there are
limits to being against Donald
Trump, although Donald
Trump expands the limits
on a regular basis.
There are limits to
being against him as a
political strategy and to
have political relevance
to voters.
You have to be for.
HARI SREENIVASAN: What
do you think about the
likelihood of passage?
MARK SHIELDS: You
know, I am not sure.
Mitch McConnell is a
master inside player.
He's a terrible outside player.
He doesn't make a
public case for it.
But, inside, he knows
the Senate well.
And, what, we have had now
five Senate say that they would
have problems with it, which
is sort of the
opening negotiation.
And Dean Heller, who we
saw earlier in Nevada,
is in real trouble.
He's up for reelection in
a tough state, in a state
that has expanded Medicaid.
I mean, Medicaid, Hari,
I think, is health care
for poorer Americans.
And what this plan does is
essentially starve Medicaid.
The Senate does it slower.
The House does it faster.
HARI SREENIVASAN: He brought
up the special elections.
We have had five now.
The Republicans seem to be
holding, if not winning.
Is this trouble
for the Democrats?
DAVID BROOKS: I think so.
I think the Georgia
loss is a big loss.
I don't think it's, oh, this is
always a Republican district,
it's not such a big deal.
If the Democrats are going to
pick up seats, it is going to
be in upscale, highly educated
suburban seats.
And this was tailor-made
for that, a seat that
Trump barely won.
And so if after all that's
happened in the last four or
five months, they can't pick
up the seat, that to
me is an indictment.
It's first a sign that
there are limits to being
anti-Trump, second, that
the Trump phenomenon
was not just a fluke, that it's
based on some deep structural
things in the economy that
are driving people to
support the Republicans,
some deep structural
things in the country,
that people are
extremely distrustful of
government and extremely
distrustful of Washington.
There's also a sign that the
Republicans, despite all that's
happened, are still considered
the party of change.
And if they want change,
they're still likely to
go to the Republicans.
And, finally, it's a
sign the Democratic
Party is too coherent.
They have got a Bernie Sanders,
which is strong and coherent,
but that's not the kind of wing
that's going to work
in this district.
And the Democratic center,
aside from the one candidate
they had down there, is meager.
And without that, there are
going to be just a lot of
districts you're not going to do
so great in.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark, he
had a four-point answer.
(LAUGHTER)
MARK SHIELDS: He did.
But I will cut it down to two.
OK?
No, politics isn't
like the Olympics.
In the Olympics, you
get a silver medal,
you get a bronze medal.
There's only one winner.
And David's right.
Close only counts in
horseshoes and hand
grenades and slow-dancing.
Coming in second, and even
a good second and a close
second, doesn't do it.
Winning is coming in first.
And the Republicans did win.
And, yes, it's a district
that Mitt Romney carried by 24
points and John McCain carried
by 19 points.
But one of the things that
turned out was, when you spend
that much money -- and give
the Republicans credit.
They turned out the
Republican vote.
When you spend that much
money, then the intensity
and the passion of the
opposition, who were
the Democrats in
this case, is kind of
neutralized by the turnout.
There were 260,000 people who
voted Tuesday in a special
election, which is 50,000 more
than voted in the
2014 general election.
So, I mean, it was a
remarkable turnout.
And you can't argue that, gee,
if we just had two more days,
it would have been a -- I
think the Democrats have to
come up with what they are for,
what is it, rather than simply
being against Donald
Trump, which is...
DAVID BROOKS: I do think -- I
would be curious to hear Mark's
view on this -- I do think,
on net, Nancy Pelosi can be
a very masterful leader again
inside, but I do think she's
become a central liability
for people around the country.
Now, the question will be,
OK, if they got rid of Nancy
Pelosi as party leader, would
the next person be
just as unpopular?
And, potentially, but I
think potentially not.
And I do think, if you're a
Democrat, you do have to think
about, who is currently the
face of our party?
HARI SREENIVASAN: Pelosi
says she's worth the cost.
MARK SHIELDS: Well,
Nancy Pelosi, I have
said before, was the most
effective House speaker
in my time in Washington.
What she did -- we talk about
the Affordable Care Act.
Barack Obama didn't pass
Nancy Pelosi passed the
Affordable Care Act.
She passed it three
times through the House
of Representatives.
She has raised $141 million
last cycle for Democrats.
Sadly, tragically,
money does matter.
Paul Ryan's political action
committee, with unnamed donors,
spent $7 million in this special
election.
So, I think, you know,
Republicans have been
running since 1984,
when Jeane Kirkpatrick
gave the keynote address
at the convention, against
San Francisco Democrats.
And, you know, maybe Nancy
Pelosi, not a dress designer,
and buy off the rack or whatever
else, but I don't think
it's going to change.
And I don't think she will be
the determining factor on the
ballot in voters' minds in 2018.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Finally, some
of the statements that have been
coming out of the White House,
more specifically from Donald
Trump, yesterday saying he
didn't know that there were any
tapes or any recordings,
that he didn't make any, this
follows a dozen false statements
at the rally that he
had in Iowa this week.
And then you kind of just go
right back to how President
Obama bugged Trump Tower or
the millions of illegal votes
for Hillary or the size of
the crowd at the inauguration.
Any structural consequence
to the office of this?
Because it doesn't seem to
be having an impact on him.
DAVID BROOKS: Right.
And I wonder, what's going
to happen to our debate?
After Trump leaves,
whenever that is, do we snap
back to what we consider
the normal standards
of honesty, or is
this the new norm?
And that's why, even though
it doesn't seem like Trump to
point out, as my paper did,
in a long list today, the
definitive guide to the lies
of Donald Trump, I think it's
still worth making that case,
because a lot - - the thing we
have to fear most is essentially
a plague of intellectual
laziness, a plague of
incuriosity, a plague
of apathy about honesty.
And once the whole political
system gets affected by
that, then we're really sunk.
And so I do think keeping his
feet on the fire, no matter
how little he pays a price
for it, is still worth doing.
HARI SREENIVASAN: Mark?
MARK SHIELDS: I would say this.
He's paying a price,
in the sense The Wall
Street Journal/NBC
poll asked voters, whom
do you believe, James
Comey or Donald Trump?
And by a 2-1 margin, voters
believe James Comey, who, until
a month ago, was a villain
to so many Democrats because
of the Hillary Clinton race.
Overwhelmingly, Americans
do not believe that he's
honest, or he's trustworthy,
he's knowledgeable,
he's experienced or he
has the right temperament.
By a 48-16 margin, they
believe the opposite.
And that is a real
liability for anybody who
wants to lead a country.
HARI SREENIVASAN: But in that
same poll, you see that it's
78 percent of Dems, 26 percent
of Republicans who have
that trust in that case.
So, Mark Shields, David
Brooks, we will leave it there.
Thank you.